---
title: 'Importance of Intentionality in Digital Consumption'
date: 2024-03-13
---

A significant amount of my time of the day is spent interacting with computers
and cell phones. Some of these are due to habits (like having a feeling of
missing out), some are due to reasons related to dopamine (like watching
movies, tv-series or content which are supposed to be fun), and some are
related to work (software development) or productivity (writing, communicating,
researching). So, I am regularly exposed to all kinds of stimulants that are
available on the internet.

I am quite confident that it is not "normal" for us human beings to be exposed
to lots of different kinds of digital stimulants at such a fast, mindless pace.

## We Can't Keep Up

Ways to consume stuff always seem to get faster and faster. For most people,
the content they consume is transforming from deeper and wider content to
shorter content that is in the form of compensated "pill"s. The existence of
"YouTube Shorts" and "Instagram Reels" is a good example of this. I don't think
there is an inherent problem with content presented in the form of "pills". I
understand that they can be useful when we don't have much time to grasp all
the details of a certain topic. However, the problem I see is that this way of
consuming content becoming the norm. Many of us constantly train our brains to
seek brief moments of feeling good, rather than deliberately focusing on one
concept and exploring it in more depth. And this happens all the time without
us even noticing it.

I think the key thing that we need to recognize is that the amount of
satisfaction (or benefit) that we obtain from consuming these contents does not
always seem to increase at the rate they become available.

The quality of our being, how we feel, and how we learn, are not solely
determined by the content or information we're exposed to but also determined
by how we intentionally react to them. The way we do things is just as
important as what is being done. The effect of me intentionally watching a
certain movie is not the same as YouTube randomly suggesting certain videos
to... The effect of choosing a topic and taking the time to learn about it is
not the same as a random platform such as YouTube recommending a random video
for learning X in Y minutes.

Think about it, even when it comes to learning and education, we see the
results of this. There are concepts well-known to many people such as "tutorial
hell". It is also quite common for people to feel like they are improving yet
they are not.

How content is consumed is just as important as the content that is being
consumed. We have to become more mindful when interacting in the realms of the
internet if we want to benefit from it.

I think this is where the concepts of *we pulling information* and *information
being pushed to us* come in handy.

## Pulling vs Being Pushed To

In communication, 'pulling' refers to the phenomenon where the receiver
actively requests specific information and then receives it. 'Pushing', on the
other hand, refers to the phenomenon where a particular piece of information is
sent to the receiver without them asking for it.

You are essentially pulling information each time you search for stuff using
Google. You are the one who is intentionally asking Google what piece of
information they need to show it to you.

In contrast, information is pushed to you when one of your favorite platforms
sends you a push notification from your phone or sends an email to recommend
you to check out their brand-new cool stuff.

Keep in mind that it is not always as easy as this to distinguish whether
information or content you encountered was pulled by you or pushed onto you.
Consider the case where you open YouTube, it is you who initially triggered the
process to open the YouTube, but as soon as you open it, you are welcomed with
a page that is full of video recommendations that you did not specifically ask
for. While from a technical point of view, it might be our HTTP request that
triggered that piece of data to be fetched, from a user point of view, we
see a page that is full of things that we did not initially intend to see.

## Maintaining Balance

While both pulling and pushing seem to be necessary, an unbalance between these
two concepts makes it harder for us to live mindfully. If you are constantly
being pushed information, you are not actively and intentionally spending your
time. You are like a leaf that is blown away in each wind. Not to mention you
can also be controlled more easily by those apps that you use thanks to their
recommendation algorithms. You converge into what is presented to you.
Likewise, if you are completely closed to information being pushed onto you,
then you are like a closed box, you might miss some of the important stuff
which are happening around you.

The thing is, it is much more common for people to lose balance by constantly
information being pushed onto them. So what most of us need is to reduce the
amount to which we are being pushed.

## Pulling is Usually Better for Being Intentional

When I reflect on my old school days, most of the things I *actually* learned
were not the ones enforced by the school curriculum. They were the topics I
found interesting anyway and took the initiative to learn on my own.

Pulling information is a more engaging process than things being pushed onto
you and our brains seem to place higher importance on the subjects we are
actively engaged with.

I think if we want to live our lives more intentionally, what we should aim for
is to be more active in the way we learn, watch, and do. The alternative is
leaving ourselves at the initiative of the companies' recommendation algorithms
which are purposefully designed by professionals so that they keep you on their
apps.

*Most of the things we are notified of, or shown are distractions.*

This being said, what things can we do if we want our exposure to pushed
information?

## Reducing Our Exposure To Pushed Content

I highly suggest that you go to the notification settings of the applications
you use. *Disable all kinds of notifications that you think are not something
you want to see deliberately.* For example if you are using a social media
platform, try to disable all kinds of in-app notifications except mentions,
comments, and so on... I also highly suggest that you disable push
notifications almost for all the apps you use unless the kind of notifications
that are being pushed to you are not related to things that are urgent like
calls, etc. *The end-goal here is not to get rid of all notifications but to
get rid of notifications that are not important for us or neither urgent.*

---

Sometimes, an app might continue to push stuff onto you by sending emails and
so on. *Using different emails for primary applications and secondary
applications might help with this as well.*

*Also, remember that it's a mistake to register an app with your primary email
if you'll only use the app for a brief moment. Use disposable emails for those
cases.*

---

We have talked about how it is sometimes hard to identify the stuff that is
being pushed on us. In some cases, even a UI element can be thought of as
something that is being pushed to us. And indeed, I think there are many cases
where certain UI designs cause more harm to us than good (while benefitting the
related company). I think "recommendations" sections are usually one of these.
*Seek for alternative, lightweight frontends for the applications you use so
that you are less distracted.* Only Let the app direct you when you need a
direction, otherwise try to remove all the noise. *If you can't find
alternative frontends to the web applications you use, you can consider using
Browser extensions that help you to minify the content you see.*

---

*Practice mindfulness.* You can set reminders for yourself to check in
periodically (I use [Bell of
Mindfulness](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/bell-of-mindfulness/lggmmceliiaoddfnbaccgpfnpoifilic)).
Make it a habit to take a breath in and out while asking yourself specific
questions such as, "Am I consciously doing what I'm doing right now, or am I
just being controlled by the algorithms?" This self-reflection can provide
clarity and intentionality to your actions.

---

And finally, remind yourself that the best thing we can do in order to be less
disturbed and distracted is actually to not use those apps which distract us at
the first place.
