content/english/blog/npc.md, before:

---
title: 'Stop Being an NPC'
draft: false
date: '2024-09-12'
---

When we encounter new information that conflicts with our current beliefs, we
typically follow one of the preceding options:

1. Ignore the new information.
2. Place it into your existing belief system, regardless of whether it is
   consistent with your other beliefs.
3. Create an ad hoc explanation to keep our beliefs intact.
4. Adjust or revise our existing beliefs.

Since the last option is typically the most demanding, and humans are
programmed through evolution to conserve energy, people usually choose the
first two options unless the information is crucial to their survival.

Many of the fallacies or biases we have developed were ingrained because they
were effective in environments where being quick and efficient was more
important than being accurate, as conserving energy was one of the greatest
challenges.

The issue is that most of us no longer live in environments where we can’t
afford to think things through. Our world has become so abstract and reliant on
complex systems with many layers, that we may be living in a time where
thoughtful analysis of how we choose to do things is more crucial than ever
.

I can't help but think about how much we could improve quality of our living if
we honestly tried to be consistent in our beliefs and approaches by applying
points 3 and 4.

# Don't delegate thinking to others!

---
> The unexamined life is not worth living. \
> \- Socrates
---

Consider the example of someone who has just started investing but lacks
knowledge in the field and doesn’t have a clear strategy. What often happens is
that they tend to look for people who seem to be experts in the domain. For
example, this person might try to copy Warren Buffett by imitating his
portfolio. How do you think this person will react if something unexpected
happens with their portfolio? Do you think they will act like Warren Buffett
when things go wrong, or do you think they will be more likely to panic and act
randomly? It's often the last one.

Don't get me wrong. I'm not saying that appealing to authority is always a bad
approach. What I'm trying to emphasize here is that whether or not you truly
believe in the system matters a lot when it comes to your consistency in
following it!

You cannot merely trust the experts as long as you understand and agree with
their way of doing things. Even experts most of the time disagree. So, if you
are blindly trying to apply what they told you without understanding the
rationale behind it, you will quickly find yourselves in a conflicted position.

**So, even if you are appealing to authority, you still have to put an effort
into choosing the right authority, the one whose approach makes sense the
most.**

As you think more about it, it becomes clear that it's not just about "experts
telling you the most optimal solution for your case." Instead, people often
seek certain types of experts without realizing it, and the supply of experts
adjusts to meet this demand. I suspect this is also why passive therapies
(where treatments are done to the patient rather than involving them in the
process and making them more aware of the situation) are more common than those
requiring patient effort. If many people are looking for an "easy solution,"
you’ll end up with experts who offer these "easy solutions." But what happens
if that easy solution doesn't actually solve the problem?

Anyway, what I'm trying to convey here is that you can’t simply delegate your
problems to experts. Because, even selecting the right expert requires some
thought, which affects the quality of the results you’ll get.

# Consistency is (almost) the best thing you can achieve

---
> We cannot live better than in seeking to become better. \
> \- Socrates
---

When you think about it, we don't seem to have much control over many things
that influence and feed us. Where we were born, the society we live in, the
content we **accidentally** encounter through some recommendation algorithm,
the influental high school teacher that we had, and so on... All these things,
in essence, can be considered as inputs that contribute to who we are. And the
thing is, we don't seem to have much control over what these inputs will be.

This is likely one of the reasons why many intelligent people disagree on
fundamental issues. The inputs that feed us are indistinguishable from who we
turn out to become.

But wait... Does not this mean that our resulting set of beliefs is kind of
arbitrary? Yeah, most of our beliefs are indeed arbitrary, in the sense that if
we were exposed to different environments we could have different beliefs. But
is not this point why we should try to put our beliefs to the test, and try to
make our beliefs at least **consistent**?

First of all, we can reduce the amount of contradictory beliefs we have. If you
hold one of the possible coherent worldviews, there is a possibility that you
might be right, most likely some of your beliefs will overlap the reality while
others don't. But, if you have contradictory beliefs at the same time, you are
certainly more wrong than the alternative set of beliefs you could have without
the contradictory beliefs.

The second point I want to emphasize is that, although consistency doesn't
always mean truth, it often brings you closer to it. When you start comparing
different perspectives, you may notice similar ideas emerge, likely as a result
of the same reasoning process. For example, it's fascinating to see that most
philosophies of life—such as Buddhism, Sufism, Christianity, Stoicism,
Epicureanism, and others—focus more on internal matters within our control,
rather than external ones. This is just one example I can think of, but you get
the idea.

Lastly, is there anything you can do better to be true than to trying
making your beliefs more coherent and inclusive? Don't think so.

While I can try to give logical inferences and arguments why you should try to
be consistent, I think this never suffices to convince a radical skeptic who
even questions whether the world exists or not (what does this mean anyway?).
So I will stop philosophizing about why you should try to be consistent here and just
finish this section quoting Marcus Aurelius.

---
> The happiness of your life depends upon the quality of your thoughts. \
> \- Marcus Aurelius
---


# Don't be afraid of being opinionated

Over time, I’ve realized that when I base my approach to a field on a
philosophy or system, making progress and building on my current position
becomes much easier. I think this is because it’s easier to maintain a routine,
especially when you understand, enjoy, and agree with it.

---
> If a man knows not to which port he sails, no wind is favorable. \
> \- Seneca
---

I believe most people who take action don't place enough importance on this
phenomenon, and as a result, their potential is limited to mediocrity at best.

The thing is, even though the opinions you get from your thinking process might
differ from those that are just as smart as you, you can still benefit from
having them.

I think following a diet plan is a good example of this. If your goal is simply
to lose weight, whether it's a carnivore, herbivore, Mediterranean, paleo, or
intermittent fasting diet, all of them are likely better than not having a plan
and randomly eating whatever is available. While one diet might be better than
others in certain ways, I believe most people would benefit from any of these
diets. The key factor is whether you can healthily stick to the diet while
maintaining a calorie deficit.

I believe this also applies to building exercise programs. Whether you're doing
calisthenics, bodybuilding, powerlifting, swimming, running, or anything else,
you're likely better off than those who don't have a plan and aren't taking
actions that are planned.

**In most cases, it is just better to have a system that you find it reasonable
and build on top of it than having none.**

In my view, many software developers lack a fundamental understanding of the
concepts they’re building on, leading them to face problems that could have
been avoided in the first place. I think those who contribute to accidental
complexity often lack a sense of craftsmanship and are more focused on just
getting the solution, regardless of how messy it is. This might be ok if they
don't truly care about the quality and maintainability of the products they
deliver, but if they happen to care about these things, I guess that even a
person opinionated towards Object-Oriented Programming -which I don't like it
much compared to Procedural or Functional Programming- might be superior
compared to copy-paste NPC developer out there.

So, despite I don't like much I still respect developers who are committed to
OOP. At least they strive for consistency through a systematic approach to
software development.

**Long story short, if you wan't to improve, just don't be so afraid to have
certain ideas and tastes even if it means sticking out.**

Commit message:

Add some highlights to npc essay

content/english/blog/npc.md, after:

---
title: 'Stop Being an NPC'
draft: false
date: '2024-09-12'
---

When we encounter new information that conflicts with our current beliefs, we
typically follow one of the preceding options:

1. Ignore the new information.
2. Place it into your existing belief system, regardless of whether it is
   consistent with your other beliefs.
3. Create an ad hoc explanation to keep our beliefs intact.
4. Adjust or revise our existing beliefs.

Since the last option is typically the most demanding, and humans are
programmed through evolution to conserve energy, people usually choose the
first two options unless the information is crucial to their survival.

Many of the fallacies or biases we have developed were ingrained because they
were effective in environments where being quick and efficient was more
important than being accurate, as conserving energy was one of the greatest
challenges.

**The issue is that most of us no longer live in environments where we can’t
afford to think things through. Our world has become so abstract and reliant on
complex systems with many layers, that we may be living in a time where
thoughtful analysis of how we choose to do things is more crucial than ever
.**

I can't help but think about how much we could improve quality of our living if
we honestly tried to be consistent in our beliefs and approaches by applying
points 3 and 4.

# Don't delegate thinking to others!

---
> The unexamined life is not worth living. \
> \- Socrates
---

Consider the example of someone who has just started investing but lacks
knowledge in the field and doesn’t have a clear strategy. What often happens is
that they tend to look for people who seem to be experts in the domain. For
example, this person might try to copy Warren Buffett by imitating his
portfolio. How do you think this person will react if something unexpected
happens with their portfolio? Do you think they will act like Warren Buffett
when things go wrong, or do you think they will be more likely to panic and act
randomly? It's often the last one.

Don't get me wrong. I'm not saying that appealing to authority is always a bad
approach. What I'm trying to emphasize here is that whether or not you truly
believe in the system matters a lot when it comes to your consistency in
following it!

You cannot merely trust the experts as long as you understand and agree with
their way of doing things. Even experts most of the time disagree. So, if you
are blindly trying to apply what they told you without understanding the
rationale behind it, you will quickly find yourselves in a conflicted position.

**So, even if you are appealing to authority, you still have to put an effort
into choosing the right authority, the one whose approach makes sense the
most.**

As you think more about it, it becomes clear that it's not just about "experts
telling you the most optimal solution for your case." Instead, people often
seek certain types of experts without realizing it, and the supply of experts
adjusts to meet this demand. I suspect this is also why passive therapies
(where treatments are done to the patient rather than involving them in the
process and making them more aware of the situation) are more common than those
requiring patient effort. If many people are looking for an "easy solution,"
you’ll end up with experts who offer these "easy solutions." But what happens
if that easy solution doesn't actually solve the problem?

Anyway, what I'm trying to convey here is that you can’t simply delegate your
problems to experts. Because, even selecting the right expert requires some
thought, which affects the quality of the results you’ll get.

# Consistency is (almost) the best thing you can achieve

---
> We cannot live better than in seeking to become better. \
> \- Socrates
---

When you think about it, we don't seem to have much control over many things
that influence and feed us. Where we were born, the society we live in, the
content we **accidentally** encounter through some recommendation algorithm,
the influental high school teacher that we had, and so on... All these things,
in essence, can be considered as inputs that contribute to who we are. And the
thing is, we don't seem to have much control over what these inputs will be.

This is likely one of the reasons why many intelligent people disagree on
fundamental issues. The inputs that feed us are indistinguishable from who we
turn out to become.

But wait... Does not this mean that our resulting set of beliefs is kind of
arbitrary? Yeah, most of our beliefs are indeed arbitrary, in the sense that if
we were exposed to different environments we could have different beliefs. But
is not this point why we should try to put our beliefs to the test, and try to
make our beliefs at least **consistent**?

First of all, we can reduce the amount of contradictory beliefs we have. If you
hold one of the possible coherent worldviews, there is a possibility that you
might be right, most likely some of your beliefs will overlap the reality while
others don't. But, if you have contradictory beliefs at the same time, you are
certainly more wrong than the alternative set of beliefs you could have without
the contradictory beliefs.

The second point I want to emphasize is that, **although consistency doesn't
always mean truth, it often brings you closer to it**. Also, keep in mind that
it is quite possible that seemingly very different philosophies can arrive at
the same conclusions in some of the most important subjects. For example, it's
fascinating to see that most philosophies of life—such as Buddhism, Sufism,
Christianity, Stoicism, Epicureanism, and others—focus more on internal matters
within our control, rather than external ones. This is just one example I can
think of, but you get the idea.

Lastly, is there anything you can do better to be true than to trying
making your beliefs more coherent and inclusive? Don't think so.

While I can try to give logical inferences and arguments why you should try to
be consistent, I think this never suffices to convince a radical skeptic who
even questions whether the world exists or not (what does this mean anyway?).
So I will stop philosophizing about why you should try to be consistent here and just
finish this section quoting Marcus Aurelius.

---
> The happiness of your life depends upon the quality of your thoughts. \
> \- Marcus Aurelius
---


# Don't be afraid of being opinionated

Over time, I’ve realized that when I base my approach to a field on a
philosophy or system, making progress and building on my current position
becomes much easier. I think this is because it’s easier to maintain a routine,
especially when you understand, enjoy, and agree with it.

---
> If a man knows not to which port he sails, no wind is favorable. \
> \- Seneca
---

I believe most people who take action don't place enough importance on this
phenomenon, and as a result, their potential is limited to mediocrity at best.

The thing is, even though the opinions you get from your thinking process might
differ from those that are just as smart as you, you can still benefit from
having them.

I think following a diet plan is a good example of this. If your goal is simply
to lose weight, whether it's a carnivore, herbivore, Mediterranean, paleo, or
intermittent fasting diet, all of them are likely better than not having a plan
and randomly eating whatever is available. While one diet might be better than
others in certain ways, I believe most people would benefit from any of these
diets. The key factor is whether you can healthily stick to the diet while
maintaining a calorie deficit.

I believe this also applies to building exercise programs. Whether you're doing
calisthenics, bodybuilding, powerlifting, swimming, running, or anything else,
you're likely better off than those who don't have a plan and aren't taking
actions that are planned.

**In most cases, it is just better to have a system that you find it reasonable
and build on top of it than having none.**

In my view, many software developers lack a fundamental understanding of the
concepts they’re building on, leading them to face problems that could have
been avoided in the first place. I think those who contribute to accidental
complexity often lack a sense of craftsmanship and are more focused on just
getting the solution, regardless of how messy it is. This might be ok if they
don't truly care about the quality and maintainability of the products they
deliver, but if they happen to care about these things, I guess that even a
person opinionated towards Object-Oriented Programming -which I don't like it
much compared to Procedural or Functional Programming- might be superior
compared to copy-paste NPC developer out there.

So, despite I don't like much I still respect developers who are committed to
OOP. At least they strive for consistency through a systematic approach to
software development.

**Long story short, if you wan't to improve, just don't be so afraid to have
certain ideas and tastes even if it means sticking out.**
